>> Giovanni, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
>> Hello, Michael. Thank you for having me on the show.
>> Yeah. It's great to have you on the show.
>> Thank you.
>> Some people you learn about just from their public speaking or
their writing and other people you meet through their projects.
I got to know you through Granian,
your Rust-based Python and other thing,
web server that I thought was really awesome.
Started playing with it and we started talking on GitHub around some ideas.
Then here you are,
sort of explore more, learn more about some of your frameworks
that you'd created from.
So I'm excited to talk about Emmet,
Granian, and a bunch of other things that you built,
all to go together in a big mix there.
>> Yeah. I'm excited as well.
>> Yeah. It should be a lot of fun.
Before though, before we get into all the details of all that stuff,
just tell us a bit about yourself.
>> Yeah, sure. I'm Giovanni Barillari.
I actually born in Italy,
but today I'm living in Vienna, in Austria.
I'm actually a physicist.
Yeah, I graduated in physics at the university.
But let's say I started working as a software engineer,
focused especially on web software pretty soon after the university.
So it's like 10 years something.
I'm working as a software engineer,
also as a cipher diabetic engineer.
So let's just say I'm quite on the back-end side of the things usually.
I actually started contributing to open source software projects,
even before actually starting working as a software engineer.
Particularly, I started contributing to the Web2Pi project.
Quite old project by Massimo Di Piero.
Today I'm working as a cipher liability engineer for Sentry.
I bet that pretty much of the people know about Sentry.
>> Yeah, awesome.
I didn't even know that you worked for Sentry until just a few minutes ago.
That's pretty awesome.
Obviously, people know Sentry,
they're big supporters of the show and sponsor some of the episodes.
But yeah, how's it like to work at Sentry? Must be fun.
>> Well, it's super nice.
A lot of talented people.
They're super nice.
It's a really nice environment to be within.
So yeah, I'm super happy.
>> Yeah, awesome.
What does a software reliability engineer do?
>> It might be a complicated question because actually,
the original title comes from Google.
So let's say is related to infrastructure and monitoring in software.
So let's say to simplify that,
it's about be sure that everything runs smoothly with no incidents and stuff like that.
>> Make sure you can monitor bugs, slowdowns.
>> Yeah.
>> Work on failover type of situations, that kind of stuff.
>> Exactly.
>> I imagine you probably use Sentry to monitor Sentry for reliability.
Is that right?
>> Yes. We have this project called Sentry for Sentry.
>> Okay.
>> Which is like a separated Sentry instance that
monitors the actual SaaS instance of Sentry.
>> That's pretty interesting because of course,
if Sentry went down, you're using it to monitor it.
Everyone else uses Sentry to monitor their thing.
It's not about when their code goes down, it doesn't affect it.
But when your code goes down,
it might actually affect your ability to know that it's down.
So a separate copy that's filed.
Okay, I hadn't even thought of that.
>> Super cool. All right.
Now, first of all,
there's a little bit of love out in the audience for your whole larger project, Emmet.
So Tshar says, "Did you say Emmet?
Emmet is amazing."
Which is super cool.
Tools like that encourage him to work on his DevTool, which is really great.
Before we get into the details of that though,
why create another web framework?
I don't mean this in a negative way.
It's just like there's Flask and Django and then we have FastAPI.
>> Yeah, there's a lot.
>> Why not just go, "I'm just going to use this one."
What inspired you to go, "I think I'll make one of them."
>> So I think we should go back a bit in time
because actually this year will be the 10th birthday of Emmet.
So let's just say it's a long time.
>> So it's not bad.
>> It's out there.
>> Okay. I see.
>> Yeah.
So originally it was released as...
It had a different name.
It was called Wepi.
And I changed the name in 2020, I think,
when I moved from synchronous paradigm to the asynchronous one.
So let's say at the time I designed Wepi,
so the original version in 2014,
the main thing was about...
So in that time, it was like the time of Ruby on Rails being super popular.
And I originally started working in web development using Ruby on Rails.
And when comparing, let's say, the amount of, let's say,
batteries included in the box of Ruby on Rails to the Python ecosystem,
so let's say that the major competitor at that point in time was Django.
But let's say that the feeling I got from Django at that time
compared to Ruby on Rails was completely different.
In a sense that I found myself spending much more time on building stuff
compared to Ruby on Rails.
And this is also what brought me to the Web2Pi project,
Web2Pi community, because it was, in a sense,
pretty similar in some of the design decisions with RAR.
But at the same time, once you start contributing to a web framework,
you have time to dig into a lot of the internals and decisions.
And so Web2Pi at that time,
so I used Web2Pi to build the code behind my first startup, actually.
And it had quite a lot of scaling issues at that time.
So let's say at that point in time, I just, you know,
was looking out for the options,
and I started digging into the code internals of Django and also Flask.
Which, I mean, I really loved the Flask approach of things,
but at the same time, it was so micro.
I mean, to build an actual project,
it required to have tons of extensions and other pieces,
let's say, other libraries to add it to the project.
So yeah, I think I ended up just saying,
"Okay, let's just rebuild Web2Pi the way I want it."
And that's eventually how WebP came out, and today I'm at...
Yeah, that's pretty much the story behind it.
- Okay. Yeah, I didn't realize it went that far back.
How about Grainian? Is that newer?
- Yeah, Grainian is, I think, like the first public release
is like from one year ago or something.
- Yeah, because I learned about Emmet through Grainian,
and I go, "Oh, it's kind of all probably all the same project."
I didn't realize the history. Why the new name? Why Emmet?
- So the thing was that to support, let's say,
the upgrade between WebP and Emmet,
so since all the interfaces have to be changed
to support a sync code, the idea was to provide,
let's say, a quick way to do that,
meaning to make it possible for developers
to install a new version of WebP
and getting everything broken because of the new interfaces.
So yeah, I just decided to change the interface
and also changing the package name in order to say,
"Okay, if you want to upgrade, you can upgrade safely.
Otherwise, you can stick."
- It's like a super mega version change.
Not only do you change the version, but you change the name.
- Yeah, exactly. - I see.
That's interesting.
All right, well, let's dive into it.
So I like the title, Emmet, the Web Framework for Inventors.
And maybe give us a sense of what are some of the core features
of Emmet, and what are your goals with building it?
- So the idea was to have all-in-one, let's say,
framework to build web application,
all-in-one, let's say, in a sense of, again,
when the project actually started.
So even 10 years after that,
I still usually prefer to develop web projects
without relying too much on front-end frameworks.
So this is like a big, let's say, preamble to the thing.
Like, this is originally from an era where, like,
front-end web framework built exists.
Like, I think it was just AngularJS and maybe Ember at that time.
- Yeah.
You're basically describing my life in 2024 still.
I'm a big fan of the server-side frameworks, you know?
- Exactly.
Yeah, also because, like, it seems sometimes that we reinvent,
like, a lot of stuff to catch up, like, the beginning.
At the end, like, yeah, I felt like all of the theme about,
you know, server-side rendering with front-end frameworks
and server-side render components and all that kind of stuff.
So sometimes it just feels, you know, we're getting back to the origins.
But, yeah.
So, yeah, the idea behind Emmet is to have, like,
all-in-one solution to develop web applications.
So you have all the standard features you have with a web framework,
so, like, routing and middlewares and that kind of stuff.
You have an ORM.
You have a templating system plus a few, let's say, tools embedded within.
So, for instance, it's very easy to use, I don't know, sessions
or to have an authentication system.
It's all, like, provided inside the box.
So, yeah, the idea was to have, like, let's say, a battery of tools,
like, in one place to do the most common things
when you start developing a web application.
Yeah, very nice.
So, yeah, like you said, it has an ORM built in,
and it feels, I guess, SQLAlchemy-ish in a sense,
but not exactly the same.
Or Django ORM would be, you know, another way in some ways there.
Yeah, I think it's more near to, yeah, to SQLAlchemy in that sense.
You tend to have, like, an API for using Python objects to build queries
rather than, how to say, use, like, a lot of strings, attributes,
like you usually tend to do in Django.
Yeah, I mean, it's more close to SQLAlchemy in that sense.
I think, like, the major difference with the ORMs out there is that
the model class you define are not, like --
so when you, for example, select records from the database,
the single, let's say, rows you select are not instances of the model class.
So let's say, like, the model class acts more like management class.
Schema definition sort of thing.
Yeah, I mean, it does, like, a lot of helpers on top of that.
But, yeah, I think, like, it's definitely the major difference between, like,
I think, like, the vast majority of ORMs out there for Python
when you usually have, like, the model class, which is also, like,
the class of all the records you select and work on from the database.
Yeah, so what do you get back in this world here?
Sorry?
What do you get if you do a query?
Like, in your example on the home page, you have a traveler.
So what do you get back when you get a group of them, a set of them?
So you get, like, a different class.
So there's, like, a separated class.
Every model has its -- it's called, like, row class.
So it's an instance of that class.
And this design, it's mostly made for two reasons.
Like, the first one is performance, in a sense,
meaning that when you select records or operate on records,
it avoids to, you know, fulfill, like, all those objects
with the actual model class attributes or functions or methods.
And the validation and stuff, yeah.
Yeah.
And on the other hand was also to kind of remind to the developer
that he is working with actual data from the database
and not, like, real Python objects, in a sense.
Yeah, yeah.
Which is -- I think, like, in the years,
is, like, the first reason why people tend to object against ORMs.
So those two were the main reasons behind this design.
It's something like, you know, in the between of an ORM
and just some database abstraction layer.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
I like the query syntax.
You know, people visit the homepage,
you'd see something like time travel dot where,
then lambda of t goes to t dot return equal equal true.
And while some of the ORMs let you write code
in terms of, like, the class fields or whatever,
it's never looked quite right because you're working with, say,
the static value out of the class,
whereas what you really are trying to talk about
is the instance level of the record, right?
So instead of saying t, you'd say time travel dot return,
but you would never test that because it's the global value of it, right?
And stuff like that.
Or you just use strings, which is basically, in my mind, no good.
But what's cool, you know, also, do you want to do an OR or an AND?
And then what weird thing do you import to do the OR?
And, like, you know, how do you wrap the query in it?
All that kind of stuff, whereas if it's a lambda,
you can just express the conditions.
Yeah, yeah, that's pretty much the idea.
So, like, to use, you know, special methods from Python objects
and translate those expressions, like, actually SQL code.
So, yeah.
Nice.
Yeah, for my apps, I have a combination of Beanie and Mongo Engine,
depending on which one you're talking about.
And for Mongo Engine, you do things that are pretty funky.
Like, if you want to say greater than, you would say, like,
time travel dot-- I don't know, it doesn't have a value, but age.
Let's say there's an age.
Like, time travel dot age underscore underscore gt equals value.
And you're like, well, it's not equal to it,
and it's not that-- that's not the name of it, but okay.
I guess that means, you know what I mean?
Like, there's a real weird way it's, like, jammed into a syntax,
whereas, like, here you say greater than whatever, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's like the same-- it's one of the things I dislike still today of Django
or in that sense.
I mean, it has, like, a lot more capabilities
because, for instance, like, when you want to represent, like,
complex queries, it tends to be more powerful in that sense,
meaning that special methods are limited.
So at some point, you start making, you know, custom methods.
So, like, I don't know, starts with, for example--
In a set, yeah, starts with or in this set or the set includes this
and something like that, right?
Exactly. So I think, yeah, there are pros and cons in both,
let's say, approaches.
Yeah, cool.
All right, so we have a lot to talk about,
even though all this code fits on one screen.
The other part is to define an endpoint.
This is about an API, right?
So you have an async def, which is awesome, supports async and await,
I think is super valuable.
Yeah, one note is that the ORM is still synchronous.
Yeah, yeah.
So what about that?
Are you planning on adding an async thing,
or are you just saying it's just synchronous?
So it's, like, a very long story in a sense because, like,
I started asking myself the same question, like, several years ago.
And I think, like, at some point, probably I will end up doing that
in the same way SQLAlchemy did that,
even if, like, I remember, like, a super nice blog post
from the author of SQLAlchemy stating that asynchronous code
and databases are not the best way to use that.
So, yeah, let's say, like, in the last few years,
I just, you know, waited in a way to see what everyone else was doing.
But, yeah, I think, like, at some point, it will be inevitable in a sense.
I just don't feel the time has come yet.
So we'll see.
Yeah, cool.
And then I guess the last thing to talk about is you have a decorator app.route,
pretty straightforward.
But then you also have an @service.json.
What's this decorator do?
So you can think about that decorator, like, the service decorator,
as, like, the JSONify function in Flask.
Yeah.
So, yeah, in Emmet, you have, like, both the JSON service and the XML service.
Yeah, because, like, in old times, I had to write stuff to, you know,
talk with XML and points and stuff like that.
So, yeah, it's just, you know, an easy way to wrap and say everything
that returns from this function, just serializing JSON or XML or whatever.
If I return, rather than a response, just return a dictionary,
and it'll do the serialization, right?
Exactly.
Nice.
And the audience asks, "Does it generate an open API documentation?"
Like, does it automatically generate documentation?
So from standard routes, no.
There's an extension, though, meaning that if you plan to design REST,
let's say, APIs with Emmet, there's an extension for that.
It's called Emmet REST, which, let's say, gives you, like,
more tools to structure your routes and serialization
and deserialization and all that kind of stuff.
And that extension also brings open API documentation generation.
Eventually, let's say, the open API documentation generation
will come also to plain routes in Emmet,
but there's quite a few design implied to do that, meaning that it's--
So Emmet, it's, like, not designed to have a strong type system
because, again, it comes from the days where, like--
- It didn't exist. - Yeah.
So let's say that, for instance, for frameworks like FastAPI,
which are practically designed on top of something like Pydantic,
so you have, like, a strong type system, so everything that comes in and out
from the majority of routes you write has types,
and so it's really easy for the framework to inspect the code
and understand what's going on.
On, let's say, general frameworks like Emmet, where you--
I mean, you might have, like, I don't know, HTML routes
or other kind of stuff going on.
There's no, let's say, design behind that to support in the first play
strong typing.
So yeah, making open API documentation out of standard Emmet routes
involves quite a lot of decisions.
So yeah, we'll see. We'll see.
Yeah, okay. Yeah, very cool.
We'll come back and talk about Emmet REST in a minute.
That's one of the fun things. It also has WebSocket support, right?
Yep. Absolutely.
WebSockets are these things that I'm always like, "Man, they're so cool,
and you can do all this interesting stuff," and then I never, ever,
ever have a use case for it in my world. I just haven't yet.
So I'm like, "Well, they're very cool," but I don't have it yet.
So I mean, I'm not building Slack.
Yeah, the thing is that usually, like, when you work with WebSockets,
it's also pretty common that you need, like, some broadcast facility.
So usually you want to do channels or that kind of stuff,
which usually tends to involve, like, other software, like you usually have
Redis or something like that in order to--
since Python is not exactly good in, let's say, managing threads
or communicating across different processes, that's probably why it's not so easy
in the Python world to actually rely on WebSockets a lot.
I don't know. For instance, if you take, like, languages like, I don't know,
Elixir or--yeah, you have, like, tons of stuff based on the fact that
everything is actually communicating over Sockets.
So, yeah.
And I think, like, one single thing to say on WebSockets,
it's I think Emmet is the only or one of the few frameworks that allows you
to write middlewares with Sockets.
So you can--so if you have, like, your chain of middlewares on the application,
you can also define behaviors for the same middlewares to behave on WebSockets.
So you can probably use, like, a lot of code.
Like, I don't know, if you are in a WebSocket and need to talk with the database,
you can use the same middleware for the database connection you use
on the standard request.
So I think that might be worth noting.
Yeah, absolutely.
Another thing that's interesting that I don't see in a lot of ORMs,
they kind of just leave it to the--well, in SQL, so you write it,
is aggregation, right?
The aggregation stuff you have here is pretty interesting,
where you do a bunch of calculation-type stuff in the database
and then get sort of the results back, right?
So here you can say, like, select--I'm talking about an event--like,
event.location, get the counts, and then group by this thing,
order by that, having these sort of--that's pretty unique.
I don't see that in a lot of ORMs.
Yeah, I think, like, you can do pretty much the same with the SQL alchemy,
but probably, like, the syntax is less sugary, let's say.
Yeah, I mean, like, again, this design comes from the fact that
with my first startup, we had to do, like, a lot of aggregation
over the database, and so, yeah, that's why I wrote all of that,
you know, to--
Yeah, that's cool.
--the same code.
Yeah, nice.
You know, I'm familiar with it from all the MongoDB stuff that I've done,
like that--
Yeah.
--aggregation pipeline over there as well.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I'm also familiar, like, I'm not a huge fan of Mongo, though,
probably because, like, being an SRE, like, making Mongo reliable
is, like, a mess sometimes, so probably that's--
I think it depends on how people rely on it, right?
Yeah.
For me, it's been absolutely--I've run my stuff on it for 10 years,
and it's been perfect.
However, that's because I use a lot of structured code to talk to Mongo
from one tech stack, right?
But if some people are just using dictionaries to talk to it,
other people are using this framework, other people are using that framework,
then the lack of a schema structure, I think, becomes a problem.
So I think it really depends on how you use it.
Yeah, absolutely.
But, yeah, I hear what you're saying, for sure.
I think that's not even necessarily a Mongo challenge.
That's a document database challenge, generally, right?
Yeah, yeah.
Mongo is primarily the way people do document databases.
Yeah, I tended to, like, use it, like, for separate stuff.
So in several projects I worked on, I had, like, for instance,
like the main database with Postgres, for instance,
and, like, another database with Mongo for specific stuff, you know,
maybe stuff you don't need transactions on,
or maybe you want to store, like, time series data,
or, you know, that kind of stuff.
So for that, I think it's really cool.
Yeah, nice.
All right, I guess one final thing here that is worth covering,
then I want to dive into a gradient as well, is the template syntax.
So you've got your own template syntax that's --
That's not a syntax.
You tell people about it. You tell them about it.
Yeah, so the template system embedded in Emmet is called Renoir,
and the idea behind it is to don't have a syntax at all.
So the idea behind Emmet template system was why --
So the question I had is, like, was always, like,
why do I have to learn a new language to write server-side rendered templates?
Like, why cannot --
And those languages are --
Yeah, and they're very, very Python-like, but they're not Python.
Exactly. So I just, you know, said, well, I guess I'll try to do just Python,
you know, wrap it in the same brackets every other templating language has.
But, yeah, so it's just plain Python.
You can do pretty much everything you can do in Python.
You can even do imports inside.
Not that I suggest to do that, but you can -- still you can do that.
You'll go crazy. Come on now.
Exactly.
The only, let's say, major difference from standard Python code is that you have to write the pass keyword
after a block of code.
So if you write, like, a for loop or an if statement, the template engine has to know when that block ends,
given that Python relies on indentation to understand like that.
But in templates, you don't have, like, the same indentation level you have in Python.
So that's the only major difference from, you know, plain Python code.
Plus a few, let's say, keyword added to the game.
So you have extend and include in order to, you know, extend and include.
So they're partial templates, let's say.
And blocks. That's it.
Right. Blocks for the layout sections, right?
Yep, exactly.
Yeah, that's really nice.
I like the idea. I'm sure there are people listening that would be like, I would like to try this stuff out,
but I've got 10,000 lines of Jinja.
Or I've got 10,000 lines of Chameleon.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, I'm working in the office with Armin Ronneker every day.
So, yeah, I mean, the amount of Jinja code we have in Sentry is, like, huge.
So, yeah, I perfectly, like, understand the point.
I don't have, like, let's say, a marketing line for selling, you know, Renoir.
It's just, you know, something that I -- so today I'm so -- I mean, I'm equitably familiar to Jinja templates and Renoir templates.
I'd say it really depends on, you know, how you usually structure your application code.
So I think, like, one good way to try out Renoir is if you tend to don't use a lot, like, Jinja filters or stuff like that.
That might be a good case scenario to try out Renoir.
But, of course, it has to be, like, a new project because, like, converting -- I mean, there's no sense into moving, you know, translating code from one system to another once you --
It's not super different.
So I think you, you know, change an end if to a pass, for example, or end for into a pass.
I was thinking more, is there a way to use Jinja within Emmet?
It's easier than using Renoir.
Yeah.
I mean, there's no plain -- there's no read extension for that.
But, I mean, if you create, like, a Jinja instance over the Emmet application, you can call it, like, in your roots.
You can even, like, create a middleware for that.
So I think it's pretty easy also to set up Emmet to work with Jinja.
Yeah, I would think so.
I created a chameleon FastAPI, which lets you basically put a decorator on FastAPI endpoints, and it does chameleon template rendering with the dictionary instead of REST endpoints.
It wasn't that -- you basically just have to juggle it from behind.
So I imagine you could probably -- someone could create a Jinja decorator.
Like, you have service.json, like a template.jinja or whatever, something like that, right?
Probably.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
That said, I'm not a fan of Jinja.
I think it's overly complicated.
So I'm not encouraging -- I'm not suggesting it.
But the reality is, even as much as I've tried to fight against it, is that the majority of Python web HTML, dynamic HTML, is done in Jinja these days.
Yeah.
Which --
Yeah, probably.
Yeah.
You kind of got to live in that space, even if you don't want to.
All right.
And let's talk about the thing that I opened -- I talked about at the opening is Granian.
Where's Granian gone?
There we go.
So this is how, as I said, I got to learn about this framework and what you're doing and stuff with Granian.
Tell us about Granian.
And as a way to sort of kick this off, Cody, who I've had on the show before from Lightstar, says, "Thanks for the work on Granian.
I've had an excellent time using it with Lightstar."
Lightstar is also awesome.
Yeah, thanks to Cody.
Yeah, so tell us about it.
Yeah.
So as the description suggests, it's just an HTTP server for Python optimization.
So it's the same -- it has the same scope of UVCorn, GUnicorn, Hypercorn, and all that libraries.
The main difference compared to every other HTTP server for Python application is that it's not written in Python.
It's written in Rust.
And it supports natively both VUSGI and ASGI, so both synchronous and asynchronous applications.
Plus a new protocol I also wrote with Granian, which is called RSGI.
But the only existing framework using it that I am aware of is Emmet, indeed.
Okay.
Yeah, I think there's a lot of things that are nice about this.
And I have actually most of the things, including Talk Python itself, running on Granian, which is pretty cool.
Cool.
Yeah, absolutely.
So single correct HTTP implementation.
Sounds awesome.
Support for version 1, 2, and 3, I guess, when it's ratified, right?
Yeah, so HTTP/3, let's say -- so since Granian is actually based on a Rust library, which is called Hyper, which is a super cool library.
It's like vastly adopted, like, everywhere in the world.
Like, I don't know how many thousands -- hundreds of thousands of libraries in the Rust ecosystem use it.
It is used in Cloudflare for a lot of their production systems.
So super strong library.
But, yes, it doesn't yet support HTTP/3.
So, yeah, I guess when Hyper will support HTTP/3, that could be easily added also to Granian.
Right.
Right, that's cool.
Yeah, with these things like Genocorn, you've then got to also integrate uvicorn workers, and you kind of have a lot of stuff at play, right?
So here you've just got one thing, which is cool.
Yeah, I mean, like, I tended to find annoying the fact that if you want, like, to squeeze out, like, performance out of uvicorn, you usually need to pile up different libraries together.
Like, oh, wait, I need to add the HTTP tools dependency so it can use, like, the C written parsers for HTTP.
Oh, wait, and probably I want some process management, so I need also Unicorn.
Yeah, it's not super easy, like, for starters, at least.
Yeah.
And I guess maybe we should just set the stage a little bit for people that don't live and breathe Python web deployment topologies.
So typically you would have something like Nginx or Caddy that the browser actually talks to, and then behind the scenes, you set up those, let's just say Nginx, to when there's a request for a dynamic content or Python-based content, as opposed to, like, a CSS file or something,
then it will talk to this category of servers that then maybe is juggling multiple processes so that it can increase the scalability of your Python apps and stuff like that, right?
So Grinion lives in that sort of bubble behind Nginx typically, right?
Use it other ways?
Yes and no, meaning that you can also deploy it, like, on the edge.
So I think it really depends how you structure, let's say, your code.
So for instance, like, for Vue applications, like in Django, we tend to -- I mean, we often, like, offload, let's say, static file serving to Nginx, since we already have Nginx somewhere,
relying on some, you know, headers we send to the response that Nginx actually parts and understand what to do.
So if -- in general, if you don't need, like, that kind of optimization, let's say, you can still use Grinion, like, even on the edge, because, I mean, it supports, like, SSL, it supports, like, HTTP/2 directly.
So, I mean, having Nginx above Grinion makes sense only if you want to root something out of Grinion and not, you know, serve it from Grinion.
But, yeah, in general, I'd say that you can use it in both ways, like, behind Nginx or not, up to the specific needs of the application, let's say.
Yeah. I have one Nginx Docker server container handling, like, 15 different apps.
So, for me, that's kind of the setup. But typically, the SSL that I do is over Let's Encrypt using Certbot.
How do I -- if I want to do HTTPS with Grinion, how do I do it?
I mean, you can keep, like, the Let's Encrypt and LACMESH generation thing, because Grinion supports the sync up signal.
So, whenever you need to refresh the certificate, you can issue a sync up to the Grinion process, and that process will reload the workers picking up the new certificate.
So, I think it's pretty straightforward. I mean, if you already manage, like, SSL certificates and, like, renewal chain and all that kind of stuff, it's pretty straightforward to do the same in Grinion.
You can just pass, you know, the paths to the certificates to the CLI command or even use environment variables, up to you.
Gotcha. Okay. One thing that I thought was pretty interesting was the performance.
Not necessarily that it's so, so, so much faster, but that it's so, so much more consistent. Do you want to talk about that a little bit?
Yeah, so, I think if you want to show to the YouTube audience the comparison thing, you find the link in the bottom of the page.
Because the first phase of benchmarks in the repository contains just benchmarks of Grinion itself.
Whereas in the versus page, you can find, like, comparison with other servers.
So, the thing behind, let's say, the stable keyword I used into describing, like, the performance of Grinion was about the fact that usually when people look at benchmarks,
just look at the number of requests.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. What's the max request per second you can get with this thing?
Exactly. But another, like, very important value, at least to me, is the latency.
Because you can still serve, like, a lot of requests in parallel, but the amount of time each request will take to be served, it's also, like, important.
I mean, I can serve, like, a thousand requests per second, but if those requests take a second, or it takes, like, 10 milliseconds, it's, like, a huge difference for the end user.
And so, the thing is that, at least from benchmarks, it appears that the way Grinion works, which relies on having, like, all the network stacks separated from Python,
so all the I/O, the real I/O part involving the network communication, is not tied to the Python interpreter, and so it doesn't suffer from the global interpreter lock and, you know, threads getting blocked between each other.
It seems to make, like, Grinion to be more, let's say, predictable in response time, meaning that both the average latency and the maximum latency you have in the benchmarks is much lower compared to other, let's say, implementations, other HTTP servers.
So, yeah, it's not, like, super faster. It won't make, like, obviously, it won't make the Python code of your application faster.
We could shut down all of our servers except for one $5 DigitalOcean server and just...
Yeah, no, not really. But at least it should, you know, normalize, in a way, the response time of your application.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, the standard deviation of the request time is way, way tighter.
The distribution of the request time is way, way tighter, even though you do seem to have generally the fastest times.
But if you look at the difference of the average times and the max times, the difference is a lot smaller.
It's like, what, two and a half times variation versus some of the other ones are many.
Yeah, 10x or something.
Yeah, 100x for some of them. Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Okay. Yeah, that's what really I thought was pretty interesting is, you know, the super predictability of it.
Yeah. One thing I want to ask you about is you did say it does this RSGI?
Do you want to call it G? GSGI? The Grainian server? No, whatever.
No, it's like Rust server gateway interface.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's what I figured. And you said Emmet uses this, which is awesome.
What's the advantage? Is there a significant advantage to doing things differently rather than ASGI or something?
Would it be worth things like Flask saying, "Hey, should we support this if we're running on top of Grainian?"
Or things like that's what I'm getting at.
So I don't actually know if Flask today also supports asynchronous.
With Quart they do.
Okay. So Quart might take advantage of RSGI, meaning that it's still an asynchronous protocol.
So you have to be in an asynchronous context to use RSGI.
But the main difference, let's say, between ASGI and RSGI is that it's in the, how to say, the communication mechanism,
or let's say the communication entities, meaning that...
So in ASGI you usually have two methods, two awaitable methods, which are like send and receive.
And you get or push, let's say, dictionaries to those methods, which are referred as messages.
So you usually have a dictionary which has a type key, which contains the type of message, which might be, I don't know, HTTP request or HTTP body or WebSocket message.
And all the intercommunication between the server and the application relies on those dictionaries with specific keys and strings.
And since you have a single, let's say, interface to rely on that, and that interface is asynchronous,
it also means you, it means two things.
The first thing is that every time you want to say something to the server or to the client,
you have to await for that message, even if there's no actually I/O involved in that operation.
Right, which is a context switch and overhead and all of that stuff, right?
Exactly. So for example, when you...
So sending back a response in ASGI involves typically at least two messages.
So the first one is to start the response.
So you start the server with the response code and the headers you want to send back to the client.
And the following message or messages are the body of that response.
The fun fact is that the response start event doesn't involve any I/O at all.
It doesn't use the network.
So what happens in that is that you delaying the operation that you are supposed to do,
which is just saying, OK, I'm going to send some data and these are the like...
It's a fact check.
Yeah. You're going to delay that operation to the next cycle of the event loop in your Python code.
So that adds quite a lot of overhead.
And I mean, I understand why the interface is made in this way, because it's super straightforward.
It's very simple. You have the same interface to do everything.
But at the same time, it feels very unperformant in a way because we are wasting like a ton of like...
I don't understand why do we need to waste event loop cycles to do something that is actually synchronous code.
Yeah, sure.
And so, yeah, RSGI changed this in a way that you have interfaces which are synchronous or asynchronous,
depending on what you're actually planning to do.
For example, like if you have the entire body.
So if your route returns a JSON stream, OK, you don't need to actually await for sending the body
because you already have like all the bodies.
Right, right. There's no I/O.
Yeah.
File, file, stream, pointer, whatever they said to return. Yeah.
Exactly. So in that case, in RSGI, you can use a synchronous method to just move the body to the server
and just let the response goes.
Whereas if you want to stream content, then you can use a specific interface for that in RSGI,
which is RESTfulStream, and that gives you like an interface to send chunks of body or iterate over something
as you're supposed to do.
So that's the major thing.
The other thing, like the other reason why RSGI exists is that, yeah, ASGI is designed based on the fact
that the network communication happens under Python, which is something that Granium can do because,
can emulate because it supports ASGI.
But that also makes, that also wastes, so if you have the chance to have a different implementation,
that makes like things a lot more difficult to implement.
Meaning reasoning, like if you were in Python, but you're actually in a different language.
So yeah, that's the other reason why RSGI exists.
Okay, yeah, that's very interesting.
Yeah, maybe some of the other frameworks could look at that and go, well, if it's available, it's an option.
Okay, a couple of things I want to talk about before we run out of time here.
One is Jazzy Coder out in the audience asks, how did you validate your library following the correct spec?
Did you reference the RFCs or another library or if you use, go down,
like your principles of the Unix networking programming book and for a background interested in this approach,
because I'm building my own WSGI server.
Okay, cool.
So the idea, so I mean, WSGI protocol is like documented in a pet.
So I just implemented tests that respect what is defined into the original pet about WSGI with just an exception.
So the only exception for Granian in WSGI protocol is that it's able to serve HTTP/2 over WSGI,
which is not supposed to happen.
But with Granian, you can serve your WSGI application directly with HTTP/2.
Yeah.
But yeah, that's the way I was sure to respect the protocol.
How about like the HTTP/2 protocol?
Are you using just a library that already has it all figured out?
Yes, yes.
I mean, reinventing the wheel, like also for HTTP handling was something I wasn't looking for.
Yeah, I would want to hear that.
Yeah, hyper is again, super battle tested.
It's used by, I don't know, something like Cloudflare in production.
And this is a rest crate or something like that?
Yeah, exactly.
Awesome. All right, very cool.
The other thing I want to ask you about or just let you speak to real quick is there's a bunch of features like specifying the HTTP interface level.
Do you want to restrict it to one or two?
You might care because there was a vulnerability in HTTP/2 to create like some kind of too much work or too many retries or something recently.
So maybe you want to switch it to one for a while.
I don't know.
Maybe talk about some of the...
Yeah, go ahead.
Fun fact, Granian wasn't affected by that because hyper, the library behind it, wasn't affected by that.
Oh, nice. That's awesome.
Yeah, I figured basically just in this case, you wait until hyper either fixes it or hyper is not a problem, right?
Which is great.
But maybe just talk about some of the things that we haven't touched on that are interesting, like blocking threads or threading mode or specifying the loop or so on.
So, yeah, so in Granian, so since Granian has this unique architecture where you have an event loop running on the Rust side.
So, for instance, if you're like deploying your ASGI application with Granian, you will have two event loops, like the Python one, the ones that runs your code and also a Rust event loop, which is actually the Tokyo runtime is another super popular crate in the Rust ecosystem.
So, there are different ways to run the Rust runtime, meaning that Rust is not limited to having a single thread running the loop.
And thus, you can have an event loop running on several different threads on the Rust side.
And so, the threading mode option in Granian lets you specify that behavior, meaning that if you use the runtime option, you will end up having like multi-threaded runtimes on the Rust side.
Whereas if you specify the workers option for the threading mode, it will still use a single threaded runtime also on the Rust side.
If you say the runtime mode, did the workers themselves each get multiple threads? Is that how that works?
Yes, exactly. So, in runtime mode, every worker has multi-threaded runtimes, whereas on the worker side, you have like the worker is also the runtime.
Yeah, got it.
And the option is there because depending on the load of your application, one of the two might work better.
Sure.
Depends on the I/O and CPU boundness of your application.
I don't want to go into too much into this, but if I set threading mode to runtime, is it reasonable to have just one worker? Or does it still make sense to have multiple workers?
So, the thing is that with a single worker, the workers will spawn their own Python interpreters.
So, every worker is limited to the global interpreter lock, meaning that even if you spawn a single worker with, I don't know, 12 threads, those 12 threads will run in the Rust code.
But they share a single Python runtime, which means all the things that that means.
Exactly. So, the only way to scale... So, the workers is the way to scale, let's say, the Python code of your application.
Okay.
So, threads are useful to scale the Rust side of the things, meaning that this will be like the amount of threads used by Rust to handle your requests.
For example, if your application runs, opens like tons of WebSocket, maybe you have like a WebSocket service, it might be helpful to spawn more threads for the Rust side, so it can actually handle more of those requests in the WebSocket land.
And the blocking threads are mostly relevant only for the Busky protocol, meaning that the blocking threads are the amount of threads used by Granian to interact with Python code.
So, on ASGI, since you will have like the event loop, there's not so much difference in how many threads you... how many blocking threads you spawn, because those blocking threads will still have to schedule stuff on the Python event loop.
But on Busky, since you don't have... you're not limited to the main thread of Python, so if you're... I don't know, maybe your application is using... you're using CycloPG to connect to the database, and those libraries are able to release the global interpreter block.
So, having multiple blocking threads on Busky might be helpful, still be helpful, because like all the code which doesn't involve the GIL will be able to run in Python.
Right. Maybe one part, one thread, one request is waiting on a database call, which hits the network, which releases the GIL, for example, right?
Exactly.
Yeah, okay. What about this loop optimizations? This opt, no op?
Yeah, that's...
What kind of magic is in there?
That's a bit complicated, meaning that I... so I think writing Runnion was super helpful for me, at least, to understand the internals of asyncIO in the Python world.
And if I have to be honest, I don't really like how asyncIO is implemented behind Hoot, but anyway...
I feel like you have to juggle, you have to be so aware of what loop is running, has a loop been created, is there a different one, have I got the wrong loop, like all of that stuff, it should be utterly transparent.
And I should just tell Python, I want to run stuff in a loop. And I don't want to... it's not like I'm managing the memory or juggling the GC.
I feel like asyncIO should be the same. You should say, I want to run stuff asynchronously, and maybe somewhere I've configured that, or maybe it's automatic, whatever.
Just do any... you're always kind of like... for example, if you talk to the database asynchronously at the start of your web app, and then you use FastAPI, and you try to use it in your request there, it'll say, well, you're on the wrong event loop.
It's like, well, why do I care about this? Just run it on the loop. You know what I mean?
That's been a complaint of mine since 3.5, but hey, nobody asked me, so...
Yeah, so... yeah, and those, let's say, optimizations are actually a few hacky parts.
In fact, I think FastAPI doesn't work with loop optimization enabled with Grainium, because it skips...
So those optimizations just skip one of the first iterations into running asynchronous code.
I think going more deeper than this in details would be long and hard to follow, but let's just say it just keeps some steps in the task running in the other loop.
Yeah, okay. You can do things like specify the SSL certificates and stuff. This one right here is pretty excellent. I mean, I don't know who worked on that one.
I didn't work on it, but I inspired... I requested this one as the right way to put... that you can say the process name, which is nice.
Yeah, yeah.
If you're running multiple sites all on Grainium on the same server, so you can differentiate...
Absolutely.
Which one is using the memory again?
And while we're looking at this, can I propose an idea and just get your feedback on it, get your thoughts?
What about a lifetime management type of feature where you say, "After 10,000 requests, just recreate the worker," or "After an hour, recreate the worker," or something like that?
Is this a thing that is in any interest to you?
So I understand the need for that, especially for... I think it's one of those requests that is based on the fact of using Busgy, or at least it's coming more from the Django user lens.
So I think making a lifetime, that kind of check would be kind of hard in a sense that there's a lot involved into the process management of Grainium,
because you have the Python process, and then you have Python threads, and then you have the Rust threads, and then you have the runtimes.
Yeah, yeah.
So reasoning of lifetime probably, it's kind of hard.
I think fixing a maximum number of requests per worker is something... Yeah, it can be done, let's say, pretty easily.
Yeah, that issue is open by... There's an issue for that open by a few times, if I recall correctly.
The thing is that in the prioritization queue...
It's not a tough...
At the moment, I'm talking with some people that propose their self to join as a contributor on Grainium, but let's say, at the moment, I'm still a single main contributor.
So I need to make some priority queues into issues.
Yeah, I think the one which is more requested right now is the access log.
So I think that would be the next one, probably.
Yeah, sure. I think honestly, that's more important, the access log than this one.
Yeah, something changed in one of my apps, and it just all of a sudden slowly just keeps growing in memory, and I'm pretty sure I've not done anything to make those changes.
And it's something in a third-party library, data access, database, or something else.
I don't know what it is, but it's just... And it's fine, but it just consumes so much memory.
So I need to set up some other thing to just say, "Look, after a day, just give it a refresh. Let it refresh itself."
You know that with Sentry SDK now we have also profiling, so you can actually look into the stacks of memory allocations even live on your application.
So if you need to debug something like that, you can try Distributed Tracing or something like that.
I mean, Distributed Tracing is more about putting together different sources.
This is profiling, like flame graphs and stuff to see where does your application...
It's driving me crazy, and I would love to just do a PR to somewhere and just go, "Hey guys, this changed. Here's the problem."
Or if it is my problem, and I just like, "There's nothing I really changed in the core of this thing, but it seems to have started going weird," then maybe I don't know.
But anyway, it would be great. I'll have a look at it. Thanks.
All right. What's next? What's next for Granian?
Yeah, I think fulfilling a couple of feature requests like the access log, like the worker max request, or a few, let's say, minor things in that sense.
I think in terms of major features, it's pretty solid at the moment as a server.
After, let's say, the idea is after these feature requests, the idea was to...
I mean, it's just an idea at the moment, but I'd like to try to add some features to the RSGI protocol.
For example, we talked before about channels and WebSockets.
As I said before, I find it very annoying every time I want to make even just a chat room, I need to put Redis there and manage Redis and whatever.
And add that kind of complexity to my project.
And so I was thinking about embedding some broadcasting features into the RSGI protocol.
Because while all other servers for Python are written in Python, and so they're still bound to the process paradigm of Python,
on the Rust side of things, that's not true anymore.
So the idea would be to have something to broadcast messages between processes and even different granular servers.
So yeah, that's what I have on my table at the moment.
All right, well, excellent. And thanks for working on this. It's an excellent project.
And it's really cool to see the innovation, like you were saying just there.
If it's not in Python, if it could be in Rust, what would we change that would make that more capable even for the Python people, right?
Yeah, exactly. And I think it's like the baseline philosophy of people like Samuel Colvin with the Pyantic project,
to try to empower Python, keeping the simplicity and the syntax we all love about Python.
But yeah, I mean, I think it's like a very good way of evolving even the Python language.
Yeah, absolutely. You know, sometimes you'll hear people say Python is slow.
And then in some sort of pure sense, that's true.
But then you put it on top of things like Grandian, and all of a sudden, it's awesome, right?
So thanks for playing your part in that.
Thank you, too.
Yeah, you bet. And thanks for coming on the show. See you next time.
Thank you. Bye.
Bye.